CHAPTER I.

ABOUT FRICTIONAL ELECTRICITY.


=1. Some Simple Experiments.= Have you ever shuffled your feet along
over the carpet on a winter's evening and then quickly touched your
finger to the nose of an unsuspecting friend? Did he jump when a bright
spark leaped from your finger and struck him fairly on the very tip of
his sensitive nasal organ?

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

Did you ever succeed in proving to the pussy-cat, Fig. 1, that
something unusual occurs when you thoroughly rub his warm fur with your
hand? Did you notice the bright sparks that passed to your hand when it
was held just above the cat's back? You should be able to see, hear,
and feel these sparks, especially when the air is dry and you are in a
dark room.

Did you ever heat a piece of paper before the fire until it was real
hot, then lay it upon the table and rub it from end to end with your
hand, and finally see it cling to the wall?

Were you ever in a factory where there were large belts running rapidly
over pulleys or wheels, and where large sparks would jump to your hands
when held near the belts?

If you have never performed any of the four experiments mentioned, you
should try them the first time a chance occurs. There are dozens of
simple, fascinating experiments that may be performed with this kind of
electricity.

=2. Name.= As this variety of electricity is made, or generated, by
the friction of substances upon each other, it is called _frictional_
electricity. It is also called _static_ electricity, because it
generally stands still upon the surface of bodies and does not "flow in
currents" as easily as some of the other varieties. Static electricity
may be produced by induction as well as by friction.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

=3. History.= It has been known for over 2,000 years that certain
substances act queerly when rubbed. Amber was the first substance upon
which electricity was produced by friction, and as the Greek name for
amber is _elektron_, bodies so affected were said to be _electrified_.
When a body, like ebonite, is rubbed with a flannel cloth, we say that
it becomes _charged with electricity_. Just what happens to the ebonite
is not clearly understood. We know, however, that it will attract
light bodies, and then quickly repel them if they be conductors. Fig.
2 shows a piece of tissue-paper jumping toward a sheet of ebonite that
has been electrified with a flannel cloth.

=4. Conductors and Non-Conductors.= Electricity can be produced upon
glass and ebonite because they do not carry or conduct it away. If a
piece of iron be rubbed, the electricity passes from the iron into the
earth as fast as it is generated, because the iron is a _conductor_ of
electricity. Glass is an _insulator_ or _non-conductor_. Frictional
electricity resides upon the outside, only, of conductors. A hollow
tin box will hold as great a charge as a solid piece of metal having
the same outside size and shape. When frictional electricity passes
from one place to another, sparks are produced. Lightning is caused
by the passage of static electricity from a cloud to the earth, or
from one cloud to another. In this case air forms the conductor. (For
experiments, see "Study," Chapter VII.)

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

=5. Electroscopes.= A piece of carbon, pith, or even a small piece of
damp tissue-paper will serve as an electroscope to test the presence of
static electricity. The pith is usually tied to a piece of silk thread
which is a non-conductor. Fig. 3 shows the ordinary form of _pith-ball
electroscope_.

The _leaf electroscope_ is a very delicate apparatus. Gold-leaf is
generally used, but aluminum-leaf will stand handling and will do for
all ordinary purposes. Fig. 4 shows a common form, the glass being
used to keep currents of air from the leaves and at the same time to
insulate them from the earth.

Electroscopes are used to show the presence, relative amount, or kind
of static electricity on a body. (See "Study," Chapter XI.)

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

=6. Two Kinds of Electrification.= It can be shown that the
electrification produced on all bodies by friction is not the same;
for example, that generated with glass and silk is not the same as
that made with ebonite and flannel. It has been agreed to call that
produced by glass and silk _positive_, and that by ebonite and flannel
_negative_. The signs + and - are used for positive and negative.

=7. Laws of Electrification.= (1) Charges of the same kind repel each
other; (2) charges of unlike kinds attract each other; (3) either kind
of a charge attracts and is attracted by a neutral body.

=8. Static Electric Machines.= In order to produce static electricity
in quantities for experiments, some device is necessary.

The _electrophorus_ (e-lec-troph´-o-rus) is about the simplest form
of machine. Fig. 5 shows a simple electrophorus in which are two
insulators and one conductor. The ebonite sheet E S is used with a
flannel cloth to generate the electricity. The metal cover E C is
lifted by the insulating handle E R. The cover E C is placed upon the
thoroughly charged sheet E S, and then it is touched for an instant
with the finger, before lifting it by E R. The charge upon E C can then
be removed by bringing the hand near it. The bright spark that passes
from E C to the hand indicates that E C has discharged itself into the
earth. The action of the electrophorus depends upon induction. (For
experiments, details of action, induced electrification, etc., see "The
Study of Elementary Electricity and Magnetism by Experiment," Chapters
VIII. and IX.)

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

_The first electric machine_ consisted of a ball of sulphur fastened to
a spindle which could be turned by a crank. By holding the hands or a
pad of silk upon the revolving ball, electricity was produced.

